[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today
we're going to start to establish proper,
solid foundations for algebra. I've
already given quite a few talks in
this series on algebra, but up till now,
it's all been rather informal, loose,
and vague, just like it's usually taught in
schools and universities. Such an approach,
even though it may be useful and
popular, is nevertheless weak logically,
and we need to move up a step or several steps
and address the issue of what exactly are the
fundamental objects. The fundamental objects
in algebra are closely related to polynomials,
and we can focus our attention, to begin with,
on this question of what exactly is a polynomial.
Well, we've seen several subtly different ways
in which this notion has manifested itself so
far. We've talked about arithmetical
expressions involving unknown numbers,
for example, 3 + 2x^2 - x^3, where x represents
an unknown number. We can think about formulas
involving a general number n, for example, our
formula for the nth triangular number. Sometimes
a polynomial is considered as a function with a
graph, something like this. Or we can think of a
polynomial occasionally in terms of a constituent
of an identity. For example, here's a variant on
the geometric series identity. It's a very nice
identity, and we can think, well, this is a
polynomial here, this is a polynomial here, there
are polynomials involved in identities like this.
So there are a number of different
possible ways of approaching polynomials,
but it's absolutely necessary to decide on
one and to specify and clarify completely
what exactly this is. Most algebra
texts fall short when it comes to
this important task. But if we do not specify
very clearly what the fundamental objects are,
the entire theory that we build is
logically weak and ultimately doesn't
really make mathematical sense, even though
it may give us a warm and fuzzy feeling.
So let us turn now to the question: how are
we going to think about what a polynomial
is? My approach is rather unorthodox
here. I believe that polynomials are
properly built on a foundation of
other objects called poly numbers,
and I'm going to tell you what poly numbers
are and how to do arithmetic with them. Once
we understand that, then what a polynomial
is will become very simple and elegant.
So let's turn to the issue: what is a poly
number? Let me remind you that so far in
our framework for arithmetic, we've talked
about natural numbers, integers, fractions,
and culminating in the rational number
field. Our basic operations are addition,
multiplication, subtraction, and division. We're
going to mimic what goes on here in a higher or
more sophisticated context. We're going to
introduce things called poly numbers or,
more particularly, positive poly numbers.
We're going to introduce integral poly numbers,
fractional poly numbers, and then ultimately
rational poly numbers. It will turn out that
rational poly numbers are also a field, just
in the same way that the rational numbers are a
field. Furthermore, these two fields—the field
of rational numbers and the field of rational
poly numbers—are the two most important fields
in mathematics. That's number one and that's
number two. So this is a very important setup that
we're doing here. We have to understand these poly
numbers, and we're going to proceed in a way which
is very analogous to how we proceeded with setting
up arithmetic in the first place. We're going to
start with the poly equivalent of natural numbers.
Let's go back to the very first videos in this
series on mathematics foundations where we were
talking about arithmetic, and I hope you recall
that we started off with the natural numbers:
1, 2, 3, and so on. We introduced a type for
those natural numbers. We said num will be the
name of that type of mathematical object. Then a
little while later, we established the integers,
which include not just the natural numbers
but also 0, -1, -2, and so on. That was its
type. Now it's useful for us to introduce
a slight variant on the natural numbers,
and we'll call these the positive numbers. The
only difference will be that we'll include zero.
So a positive number is, by definition,
a natural number or zero. We'll call that
new type num plus. It's just a little bit more
than the natural numbers; we've thrown in zero.
When I started this video, I had to decide whether
I was going to start with this as the basic object
or this as the basic object, and there were good
reasons to do either of them. In computer science,
it's often useful to start counting with zero, but
I felt that historically and perhaps intuitively
it was more natural to start with one. However,
it's clear that zero together with the natural
numbers is also an important mathematical object,
and so now we have a name for it and a new type.
Alright, so now let's define what a positive
poly number is. This is a fundamental definition:
a positive poly number is a list of
positive numbers written vertically
with a bracket on top. So there's P;
that's a positive poly number. n0, n1,
n2 down to some nk—these are all positive numbers
in the sense that we've just defined here. So
they're all either zeros or natural numbers,
and there's a bracket on top of this list,
alerting us to the fact that this object
is a new kind of object called a positive
poly number. These are going to be the
building blocks for this new arithmetic.
So for example, here is a positive poly number:
it's (1,3) with a bracket on top. Here is Q,
which is (2,2,1,4). Here is R, which is just
(1,7) with a bracket on top of it. Here is T,
which is (0,3,0) with a bracket on top of it.
Now there's an important notion of equality
between two positive poly numbers. We say
that P and P'—two positive poly numbers—are
equal precisely when one can be obtained
from the other by adding or removing
zeros from the bottom. So for example,
this positive poly number and this positive poly
number are equal because this one's obtained
from this one by adding a zero on the bottom or
conversely this one's obtained from this one by
removing a zero from the bottom. Here in this
example, here are two positive poly numbers
which are not equal: we've removed a zero,
but we haven't removed it from the bottom,
so that's no good. You're not allowed
to do that. This is not equal to this.
There are two basic operations on positive
poly numbers, just as there are on natural
numbers. These operations are addition
and multiplication. Addition is very easy;
multiplication is less easy. Let me illustrate
these by giving you a challenge. I'm going to
just illustrate what the two operations
do in some examples. I'm going to ask
you to go away and figure out what
the operations are by studying these
examples. I'm only going to give you one
example for addition because it's so easy.
So here's an example of the addition
of this poly number with this poly
number: (1,2,3) + (2,3,1) = (3,5,4). I've
given you three examples of multiplication:
(1,2) * (2,1) = (2,5,2); (1,1,1) * (1,1,1) =
(1,2,3,2,1); (2,0,1) * (1,1) = (2,2,1). I want you
to study these three examples. If it's not obvious
to you already—I know for some of you it will be
completely clear—but if it's not, make sure you
understand or try to unravel what the rule is.
Next time, I'm going to very clearly
lay out what these two operations are,
and we're going to start doing arithmetic
with poly numbers. But multiplication is so
important that it's useful for you to think about
it beforehand to try to get some feeling for it.
So next time, it's arithmetic
with positive poly numbers. I hope
you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]